<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XVI</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-16" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XVI</h2>
				<h3 epub:type="title">Strange Phenomenon of the Dissociation of Matter</h3>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead"></p>
				<p epub:type="bridgehead">Extract From The Note-Book Of Joseph Rouletabille, continued</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>“I am again at the window-sill,” continues Rouletabille, “and once more I raise my head above it. Through an opening in the curtains, the arrangement of which has not been changed, I am ready to look, anxious to note the position in which I am going to find the murderer⁠—whether his back will still be turned towards me!⁠—whether he is still seated at the desk writing! But perhaps⁠—perhaps⁠—he is no longer there!⁠—Yet how could he have fled?⁠—Was I not in possession of his ladder? I force myself to be cool. I raise my head yet higher. I look⁠—he is still there. I see his monstrous back, deformed by the shadow thrown by the candle. He is no longer writing now, and the candle is on the parquet, over which he is bending⁠—a position which serves my purpose.</p>
			<p>“I hold my breath. I mount the ladder. I am on the uppermost rung of it, and with my left hand seize hold of the window-sill. In this moment of approaching success, I feel my heart beating wildly. I put my revolver between my teeth. A quick spring, and I shall be on the window-ledge. But⁠—the ladder! I had been obliged to press on it heavily, and my foot had scarcely left it, when I felt it swaying beneath me. It grated on the wall and fell. But, already, my knees were touching the window-sill, and, by a movement quick as lightning, I got on to it.</p>
			<p>“But the murderer had been even quicker than I had been. He had heard the grating of the ladder on the wall, and I saw the monstrous back of the man raise itself. I saw his head. Did I really see it?⁠—The candle on the parquet lit up his legs only. Above the height of the table the chamber was in darkness. I saw a man with long hair, a full beard, wild-looking eyes, a pale face, framed in large whiskers⁠—as well as I could distinguish, and, as I think⁠—red in colour. I did not know the face. That was, in brief, the chief sensation I received from that face in the dim half-light in which I saw it. I did not know it⁠—or, at least, I did not recognise it.</p>
			<p>“Now for quick action! It was indeed time for that, for as I was about to place my legs through the window, the man had seen me, had bounded to his feet, had sprung⁠—as I foresaw he would⁠—to the door of the ante-chamber, had time to open it, and fled. But I was already behind him, revolver in hand, shouting ‘Help!’</p>
			<p>“Like an arrow I crossed the room, but noticed a letter on the table as I rushed. I almost came up with the man in the ante-room, for he had lost time in opening the door to the gallery. I flew on wings, and in the gallery was but a few feet behind him. He had taken, as I supposed he would, the gallery on his right⁠—that is to say, the road he had prepared for his flight. ‘Help, Jacques!⁠—help, Larsan!’ I cried. He could not escape us! I raised a shout of joy, of savage victory. The man reached the intersection of the two galleries hardly two seconds before me for the meeting which I had prepared⁠—the fatal shock which must inevitably take place at that spot! We all rushed to the crossing-place⁠—Monsieur Stangerson and I coming from one end of the right gallery, Daddy Jacques coming from the other end of the same gallery, and Frederic Larsan coming from the ‘off-turning’ gallery.</p>
			<p>“The man was not there!</p>
			<p>“We looked at each other stupidly and with eyes terrified. The man had vanished like a ghost. ‘Where is he⁠—where is he?’ we all asked.</p>
			<p>“ ‘It is impossible he can have escaped!’ I cried, my terror mastered by my anger.</p>
			<p>“ ‘I touched him!’ exclaimed Frederic Larsan.</p>
			<p>“ ‘I felt his breath on my face!’ cried Daddy Jacques.</p>
			<p>“ ‘Where is he?’⁠—where is he?’ we all cried.</p>
			<p>“We raced like madmen along the two galleries; we visited doors and windows⁠—they were closed, hermetically closed. They had not been opened. Besides, the opening of a door or window by this man whom we were hunting, without our having perceived it, would have been more inexplicable than his disappearance.</p>
			<p>“Where is he?⁠—where is he?⁠—He could not have got away by a door or a window, nor by any other way. He could not have passed through our bodies!</p>
			<p>“I confess that, for the moment, I felt ‘done for.’ For the gallery was perfectly lighted, and there was neither trap, nor secret door in the walls, nor any sort of hiding-place. We moved the chairs and lifted the pictures. Nothing!⁠—nothing! We would have looked into a flower-pot, if there had been one to look into!”</p>
			<p>When this mystery, thanks to Rouletabille, was naturally explained, by the help alone of his masterful mind, we were able to realise that the murderer had got away neither by a door, a window, nor the stairs⁠—a fact which the judges would not admit.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
